I didn't even bat an eye at this, because this feels like the typical feel-good
stuff big tech companies do to avoid having to actually deal with issues.
So the CEO of Github
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/natfriedman/status/1271253144442253312) about
looking into ways to change the default branch's name from "master" to
something else.

===ENDPREVIEW===

This is in line with several tech companies suddenly realizing that terminology
such as "master/slave" "whitelist/blacklist" can be problematic. There is an
argument to be had, that the name "master" of git's default branch is more in
line with the term's use to describe the original source of a work. E.g. the
gold-master of a music album. But git's use of the word actually is inherited
from _BitKeeper_, where the "master/slave" metaphor was in use.

But all of this doesn't really matter in the grand scheme of things. Or not for
marginalized groups at least. This is all just feelgood stuff for Silicon
Valley folks. So I wanted to ignore it... and then the discussions happened.

Oh my fucking god. People jumped to the worst possible interpretation of this
suggestion. "THEY WILL FORCIBLY MODIFY ALL OUR REPOSITORIES AND BREAK OUR
SHIT". Lol no shut the fuck up they won't. Github's sole reason for existence
is to provide some hosting space for your shit. They won't modify it. Whats more
likely is that Github will change the default OR PROVIDE AN OPTION to set the
default branch's name when creating a new project. This would be in line with
[the way Gitlab is handling this](https://gitlab.com/gitlab-org/gitlab/-/issues/220906).

And guess what? This breaks nothing. Plus you can now name your default branch
whatever. No matter the reason for naming it something else, this is actually
a pretty useful feature.
